File: README.md
Purpose: Describing the functionality, usability, and development of the ShortestMiddPath package
Author: Samuel Cramer
Course: CS 302 26S
Professor: Kimmel
Date: 30th April 2026




Description:
The following package contains 5 classes as well as a Data Directory, with a VT road network dataset from https://geodata.vermont.gov/datasets/1dee5cb935894f9abe1b8e7ccec1253e_39/explore?location=44.012457%2C-73.169069%2C15, in order to implement the Bellman-Ford algorithm to find the shortest distance between 75 Shannon Street and two food establishments in the Town of Middlebury, specifically Two Brothers Tavern and Yogurt City. I have included the ALL_ROADS.csv in the data directory, as the full VT statewide road network dataset, but as the instructions of the assignment state to have the filtered CSV (only visible and Middlebury roads), I have also included the filtered version of the statewide CSV (a Middlebury-only CSV) in the package. This was to demonstrate how I used my ReadCSV.java class in order to perform the filtering, as I wanted to make sure that it was clear how I got that condensed CSV in the first place. I originally wanted to do driving as the means of transport, considering thus one-way roads and their directions as well, but after finding some discrepancies in dataset with the actuality, with for example Franklin Street not being listed as a one-way road in the dataset but being one-way in reality, I decided that I would rather have a correct walking path, than a factually incorrect driving path generated by my ShortestMiddPath package. In terms of the Bellman-Ford algorithm itself, it is run on the entire Middlebury road network, before the user is prompted in the terminal to type 1 or 2, corresponding to their two choices (Two Brothers or Yogurt City) of where they would like to go to. Then, users are given the exact pathing by road along with the distance followed on each road, in order to determine the directions they need to take to reach a specific location, before finally stating that they have arrived, in a similar style to a real GPS. One other point that I would like to make is that in order to decide how to make the road network with specific locations corresponding to 75 Shannon Street, Two Brothers, and Yogurt City, I found the intersection nodes closest to these places. Due to how close each of these locations is to the intersection nodes, the margin of error of not adding any additional positional adjustments in terms of navigation is negligible; navigating to and from these nodes effectively replicates the geographical movements necessary by a pedestrian to perform this pathing. The algorithm runs in O(n^2 + nm) time, matching the requirements.


Following the advice of Professor Kimmel during my in-person code review for the previous programming assignment, I focused on dividing my code into multiple classes, and implementing more 201-style code, attempting encapsulation in my project. I think that these two Java assignments have helped immensely in improving my Java skills.




Classes:




Main.java
This class contains one private static constant, the origin node final String, which corresponds with approximately 75 Shannon Street’s location in the road network, which I found through manual search in the interactive map. The purpose of this class is to perform the higher-level logic in the main method, where the CSV data is read by calling ReadCSV, a RoadGraph is created with the graph Data, and a BellmanFord object is created by the RoadGraph object we create, in conjunction with the ORIGIN_NODE. User input and interaction is also handled in this method. We also have two other methods, printNavigation, which prints the pathing in terms of roads and distance to their desired destination, and formatNavigation, which organizes the prints in a GPS-like format.


   Methods:
main: performs the brunt of the logic, linking the other classes together in order to read the CSV data on Middlebury’s road network, create a corresponding graph object, running the bellman ford algorithm on all intersection nodes, asking users to input their food establishment of choice, and using a call of printNavigation to give the user instructions for the pathing to their desired location.
printNavigation: uses the bellman ford algorithm, the graph we create, the target destination’s node ID, and its name, to be able to find the appropriate navigation instructions to be printed to the user, skipping repeated streets, and summing road lengths to provide users with total path distance. formatNavigation is called in order to provide GPS-like navigation data.
formatNavigation: uses the road we travel on, the distance covered by that road, the target node, the ending node of the road, and the road graph to be able to determine what sorts of instructions should be printed to the user in printNavigation, corresponding with if the road being traveled on will reach the destination, or if there is an intersection where a different navigation instruction must be followed, avoiding cases where multiple road segments are made of the same road, despite no intersection with other roads.
getMethods : self-explanatory


RoadGraph.java
This class allows us to create the RoadGraph object, which allows us to turn the CSV data we have from ReadCSV.java into a usable graph to have the Bellman-Ford algorithm run on. We only have get methods, the constructor method (which treats every road as two-way, given pedestrian means of transit), and the addEdge method. Each RoadGraph object stores a reverse adjacency list HashMap ( for fast get methods and a way to use strings as keys in an efficient data structure). We also store the set of allNodes in a HashSet.


   Methods:
   1. RoadGraph: the constructor method, which uses the CSV data to create bidirectional edges in our graph, updating the reverseAdjacencyList and the set of all nodes as CSV data is processed. 
   2. addEdge: the helper method which adds a new String key to the RAL if it doesn’t exist yet, and then adding the new edge leading to a node to the RAL. 
   3. getMethods : self-explanatory


BellmanFord.java
This class allows us to run the Bellman-Ford algorithm on the graph we created, utilizing a reverse adjacency list for improved runtime O(n^2 + nm) vs O(n^3). We store 3 datafields, dist, a HashMap which contains the shortest distance to each node in the graph from the origin (best found so far), pred, a Hashmap which contains all of the preceding nodes used to reach a each node (best found so far), and roadUsed, a Hashmap which contains all the edges/roads taken to reach a particular node (best found so far). The class contains the constructor method, which also calls the Bellman-Ford Algorithm method, the get methods, and the Bellman-Ford algorithm method, which runs the algorithm on the full Middlebury (input) graph.


   Methods:
   1. BellmanFord: a constructor method that takes in the RoadGraph and source String and calls the Bellman-Ford algorithm in runAlgorithm.
   2. runAlgorithm: the bellman ford algorithm implementation, where the road graph and source String are used to return the shortest paths to all other nodes from the origin node, storing updates in the private datafields of the class.
   3. getMethods : self-explanatory


Edge.java
This class essentially allows us to create the Edge object, which represents individual streets in the road network. We store the name of the street in a final string, its origin(for further use in the reverse adjacency list), which is another final string, and its miles to align with the weighting/distance of each edge, which is a final double. The only methods here are the get methods and the constructor.


   Methods:
Edge: a constructor method that takes in origin String, miles double, and streetName String, to allow for simpler storage of Edge attributes as an object rather than looping through CSV lines. 
getMethods : self-explanatory


ReadCSV.java
This class contains several data fields, 6 static final ints corresponding to the column indices of the relevant columns, and 3 static final strings corresponding to the locations of files within directories as well as the Middlebury City code. We also have a splitCSV method to ensure commas within quotes are split correctly when processing CSVs, filterData, which is how I made the MIDDLEBURY_ROADS.csv file (and only runs all the way through if it doesn’t yet exist and otherwise returns quickly, and is mostly there to show the grader how it was created from ALL_ROADS.csv (read/write), and loadData, which reads MIDDLEBURY_ROADS.csv and extracts relevant columns for input to the RoadGraph.java class. This class allows us to process CSV data into a usable format.


   Methods:
   1. splitCSV: A method that that performs the splitting by commas without counting those within quotation marks, using a regex from stackoverflow
   2.  filterData: A method that uses the origin file, ALL_ROADS.csv, to create the MIDDLEBURY_ROADS.csv file, if the file doesn’t already exist, using a buffered reader and writer, so that only visible Middlebury roads are processed by our algorithm.
 loadData: A method that takes the important columns of the MIDDLEBURY_ROADS.csv file, and returns them in the format of an ArrayList of String arrays, to be used by our RoadGraph.java file.


Comparison to Brute Force for Small-N Instances:

To accomplish brute force, we have to check all the possible path from the source node to the target nodes, then find the minimum distance. This is doable when n is small, as I was able to manually check all the possible paths within the first 5 intersection nodes that we can reach from 75 Shannon Street using the VT map for the dataset. Then I added up the distances for each path that I traced and found the shortest path. Finally, I printed the A matrix through running the Bellman-Ford algorithm , ensuring that the minimum distances were the same as the manually calculated ones.

For small n values, the benefit of Bellman-Ford over brute force doesn't seem apparent, as there aren't many paths that are necessary to check in this case. But when we consider the full Middlebury Town road network, or maybe even on larger scales such as State or Nationwide, it seems quite tedious to do a manual check, showing the benefit of the Bellman-Ford algorithm, especially since it runs in polynomial runtime relative to the number of edges and vertices in the road graph/network.  


Testing:
I accomplished testing primarily through print statements and manual checking of outputs (corroboration with road network map). I checked total distances and street names with Google Maps, and corroborated with those returned by my algorithm. I also temporarily printed the A matrix generated by Bellman-Ford in order to check that the minimum distances between nodes were being correctly being updated with each increase in the number of edges that were "permitted". In doing this, I saw that the best path from 75 Shannon Street to Yogurt City was found in 5 segments, and that 75 Shannon Street to Two Brothers was found in 6 segments. After this, I verified by looking at individual segments on the map that the quantity of segments corresponded with the smallest possible path. I didn't need to test my regex, as it worked for the previous assignment showed that it successfully processed CSV rows, and the HashMap and HashSet usage suggested by Gemini and GeeksforGeeks.org was tested by evaluating the success of the full algorithm implementation. The print syntax obtained by Gemini was checked by checking that the terminal output the correct street names, distances (with 4 decimals), intersections, and directions. 

I discovered some major edge cases when it came to my process of printing navigation information to the user. Before implementing my check of if the next roadsegment was the same, if there were two roadsegments of the same name, they were printed twice, which doesn't make sense for most users, which was the case with the intersection of Weybridge and Mill Street. To avoid this, I made a check that prevented duplicate street segments from being repeated. Furthermore, when I tried to implement the display of the intersecting nodes during navigation, I noticed that if I tried a road  that was broken up but didn't have any real intersection with another road, that my output wasn't quite what I wanted. This was the case when I tested such a road, Creek Road. To avoid incorrect prints, I implemented a check where if after removing the road we are currently on the list of intersections becomes empty, we change our message to be about following the original road, rather than claiming there was an intersection that wouldn't exist for a real pedestrian user.

As stated previously, the print statements (such as the A matrix printing) was removed for this submission as it was really a test line.



Resources: 

In terms of resources, I once again employed the level 1 resources. 

First of all, I used: https://geodata.vermont.gov/datasets/1dee5cb935894f9abe1b8e7ccec1253e_39/explore?location=44.012457%2C-73.169069%2C15 for my data source.

Like last time, I used Stack Overflow to find a regex that would allow me to split lines in the CSV file without incorrectly processing commas that are inside quotation marks.
I got this from: 
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/18893390/splitting-on-comma-outside-quotes

I also used GeeksforGeeks in order to help me figure out how to use HashMaps and HashSets, as I needed some corroboration of my Gemini prompt in terms of using HashSets as a means of permitting Strings representing node IDs as input keys. I used HashSet for the set of nodes, as I used my previous logic following 201 about it being an efficient data structure that would allow me to have uniqueness (no duplicates).
I got this from: 
https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/java/difference-between-hashmap-and-hashset/

I also used Google Gemini for two specific use cases.
First, I asked "best java data structure that is fast for get method and allows strings as keys" which returned HashMap as it's response. I corroborated this information with a geeksforgeeks.org tutorial (above) and with my own knowledge from 201 that the get method was O(1) on average using hash. This helped me for the reverse adjacency list, as well as prevDist, prevPred, prevRoad, currDist, currPred, and currEdge within the BellmanFord.java class. 

Second, I asked "how to create F strings that have two inputs, a float with 4 decimal points and a string" in order to help me have correct syntax for the print statements within the formatNavigation method.




